Part I.

The other day I was walking along the high road to Tula. It was on the Saturday of Holy Week. The people were driving to market in lines of carts, with calves, hens, horses, cows (some of the cows were being conveyed in the carts, so starved were they). A wrinkled old woman was leading a lean, sickly cow. I knew the old woman, and asked her why she was leading the cow.

"She's without milk," said the woman. "I ought to sell her and buy one with milk. Likely I'll have to add ten rubles, but I have only five. Where shall I take it? During the winter we have had to spend eighteen rubles on flour, and we've only got one bread-winner. I live alone with my daughter-in-law and four grandchildren. My son is house-porter in town."

"Why doesn't your son live at home?" I asked.

"He's nothing to work on. What's our land? Just enough for Kvas.

A peasant went tramping along, thin and pale, his trousers bespattered with mine clay.

"What business in town?" I asked.

"To buy a horse. It's time to plow and I haven't got one. But they say horses are dear."

"What price do you want to give?"

"Well, according to what I have."

"How much have you?"

"I've scraped together fifteen rubles. But what can you buy at the present time for fifteen rubles?

"A knacker's beast," put in another peasant.

"In whose mine do you work?" I asked, glancing at his trousers stretched at the knee and colored with red clay.

"In Komaroff's, Ivan Komaroffs."

"Why have you made so little?"

"Oh, I was working for half profit."

"How much did you earn?" I asked.

"Two rubles a week or even less. What can one do? Bread didn't last till Christmas. We can't buy enough."

A little further, a young peasant was leading a sleek, well fed horse to sell.

"Nice horse," said I.

"Couldn't be better," said he, thinking me a buyer. "Good for plowing and driving."

"Then why do you sell it?"

"I can't use it. I've only two allotments. I can manage them with one horse. I've kept them both over the winter, and I'm sorry enough for it. The cattle have eaten up everything, and we want money to pay the rent."

"From whom do you rent?"

"From Maria Ivanovna. Thanks be to her, she let us have it. Otherwise it would have been the end of us."

"What are the terms?"

"She fleeces us of fourteen rubles. But where else can we go? So we take it."

A woman passed driving along with a boy wearing a little cap. She knew me, clambered out, and offered me her boy for service. The boy is quite a tiny fellow with quick, intelligent eyes.

He looks small, but he can do everything," she says.

"But why do you hire out such a little one?"

"Well, sir, at least it'll be one mouth less to feed. I have four besides myself, and only one allotment. God knows, we've nothing to eat. They ask for bread and I've none to give them."

With whomsoever one talks, all complain of their want and all similarly from one side or another come back to the sole reason. There is insufficient bread, and bread is insufficient because there is no land.

These may be mere casual meetings on the road, but cross all Russia, all its peasant world, and one may observe all the dreadful calamities and sufferings which proceed from the obvious cause that the agricultural masses are deprived of land. Half the Russian peasantry live so that for them the question is not how to improve their position, but only how not to die of hunger, they and their families, and this only because they have no land.

Traverse all Russia and ask all the working people why their life is hard, what they want, and all of them with one voice will say one and the same thing, that which they unceasingly desire and expect, and for which they unceasingly hope, of which they unceasingly think.

They cannot help thinking and feeling this, for, apart from the chief thing, the insufficiency of land for the maintenance of most of them, they cannot but feel themselves the slaves of the landed gentry, and merchants, and landowners, whose estates have surrounded their small insufficient allotments, and they cannot but think and feel this — for every minute, for a bag of grass, for a handful of fuel, without which they cannot live, for a horse gone astray from their land on to the landlord's, they perpetually suffer fines, blows, humiliation.

Once, as I was going along the road. I entered into conversation with a blind peasant beggar. Recognizing in me from my conversation a literate man who read the papers, but not taking me for a gentleman, he suddenly stopped and gravely asked: "Well, and is there any rumor?"

I asked, "About what?"

"Why, about the gentry's land."

I said I had heard nothing. The blind man shook his head and didn't ask me anything more.

"Well, what do they say about the land?" I asked a short time ago of a former pupil of mine, a rich, steady, and intelligent literate peasant.

"It is true the people prattle."

"And you yourself, what do you think?"

"Well, it'll probably come over to us," he said.

Of all events which are taking place, this alone is important and interesting to the whole people. And they believe, and cannot but believe, that it will "come over."

They cannot but believe this, because it is clear to them that a multiplying people living by agriculture cannot continue to exist when only a small portion of the land is left them from which they must feed themselves and all the parasites who have fastened on to them and are crawling about them.
