Part VIII.

"Great social reforms," says Mazzini, "always have been and will be the result of great religious movements."

Such is the religious movement which is now pending for the Russian people, for all the Russian people, for the working classes deprived of land as well as, and especially for, the big, medium, and small landowners. And for all those hundreds of thousands of men who, although they do not directly possess land, yet occupy an advantageous position, thanks to the compulsory labor of the people who are deprived of land.

The religious movement now due among the Russian people consists in undoing the great sin which for a long time has been hurting and is dividing men, not only in Russia, but in all the world.

This sin can be undone, not by political reform, nor Socialistic schemes for the future, not by revolutions in the present, and still less by philanthropic assistance or governmental organization for the purchase and distribution of land among the peasants.

Such palliative measures only distract attention from the essence of the problem and thus retard its solution.

No artificial sacrifices are necessary, no concern about the people there is only necessary the consciousness of this sin by all those who commit or participate in it, and the desire to free themselves from it.

It is only necessary that the undeniable truth which the best men of the people always knew and know — that the land cannot be the exclusive property of some. And that the non-admission to the land of those who are in need of it is a sin — that this truth should become generally recognized by all men. That people should become ashamed of retaining the land from those who want to feed themselves from it. That it should become a shame in any way to participate in this retention of the land from those who need it, a shame to possess land. A shame to profit by the labor of men compelled to work only because they have been deprived of their legitimate right to the land.

It is necessary that there should occur that which took place with the law of serfdom when nobles and landowners became ashamed to possess serfs. The Government became ashamed of maintaining these unjust and cruel laws, when it became evident to the peasants themselves that an utterly unjustifiable iniquity was being committed upon them. The same must take place also with landed property. And this is necessary, not for any one class, however numerous it may be, but it is necessary for all classes, and not only for all classes and all men of any one country, but for the whole of mankind.
